# SandSat

Readme is being updated (as on 14th May 2020)

Sand is one of the most valuable resources we have available today. It forms the very basis of the modern civilization. Over the last few years, we have seen an exponential increase in the demand for this valuable yet exhaustible resource. These alarming rates are a result of an ever-increasing building construction project and other infrastructural development. This unprecedented demand has resulted in an imbalance in the availability and accessibility of sand. Consequently, the process of acquiring it has become expensive and laborious for builders. Ergo, numerous networks have cropped across the world who conduct illegal sand mining activities. Even though we have vast expanses of sand in the Sahara and other deserts, this type of sand is not suitable for construction as the grains are rounded and cannot form an optimum bounding which is necessary for internal stability. Therefore, the sand found near rivers, lakes and sea/ocean shorelines is more desirable because they are mostly angular. These regions are regarded as a critical resource in given its recreational, environmental, and economic importance. Yet, these are the worst affected areas due to illegal sand mining. Figure 1 shows the remote sensing images generated from Landsat data for the Poyang lake. The figures are 18 years apart and illustrates the effects of illegal sand mining activities in one of the worst affected areas in the world. 


The scale at which sand mining takes place highly varies from large coordinated networks dredg- ing sand with massive machines to independent people stealing sand with shovels. This has catas- trophic effects on inhabitant’s livelihood, undermines local infrastructure, and disrupts ecosys- tems. It is, therefore, critical for governmental & environmental agencies to observe and quantify these changes around these regions. At present, the detection and monitoring of illegal sand mining is highly tedious, in-efficient and unsafe in some cases. The open data on illegal sand min- ing today comes from in-situ measurements. However, this is limited to only a few spots in the world. The primary source of information on such activities comes from inhabitants and activists who would like to raise awareness. However, in most cases, their claims are disregarded due to lack of evidence. Furthermore, this large manual effort restricts the ability of governments and environmental agencies to identify and curb these illegal activities. The observations around the potentially affected areas are vital in understanding previous trends and calibrate prediction mod- els capable of forecasting changes. Publicly available remote sensing data from Earth Observation Satellite constellations such as Landsat & Copernicus, provide a low-cost solution in obtaining long-term observations of these regions. 

As part of the Mothership Missions challenge, we - Team Sahara, developed an autonomous method that combines satellite remote sensing observation with information from inhabitants & activists to rapidly detect and monitor illegal sand mining activities. Figure 2 shows the end-to-end pipeline of our proposal to tackle the above-mentioned problem.

The first step of the pipeline, is the development of a mobile application - Sahara1 in order to provide inhabitants & activists a safe platform to raise concerns regarding illegal sand mining activities. This application will facilitate the users to request an in-depth analysis of a potential illegal sand mining area. In the next step the available data for the "flagged" region is downloaded and processed for further analysis. We utilise Google Earth Engine to retrieve satellite images from Landsat and Copernicus constellations. Over the course of the challenge we have built the SandSat toolbox which processes this input to facilitate detailed time series analysis of the shore- line changes to identify potential sand mining activities. Furthermore, we utilise the past data to predict the shoreline dynamics within a level of uncertainty. These results are then sent to all stakeholders (such as government agencies, media outlets, environmental agencies) including the original requester, while concealing the identity of the user upon request. We performed prelim- inary analysis on a specific region of Poyang Lake (Figure 1) as a use-case for SandSat. The tool was able to autonomously detect shorelines in the study area after identifying an optimal set of input parameters with the Monte Carlo Simulations. Figure 3 shows the extracted shoreline for the use case. Furthermore, with time series decomposition we were able to identify spots over the timeline that indicate potential sand mining activities. The time series decomposition for the shoreline per unit time is presented in Figure 4. The rate of change of shoreline is denoted as observation in the figure. With the help of this method the observation is broken down in the following components - Trend, Seasonal & Residual. For our purposes the trend is the most im- portant component, since erratic changes in trend denote potential sand mining activities. This can be noticed in the figure with steep slopes on the trend. Adding, additional information such as dredging contracts, weather data etc. into this graph can spot potentially illegal sand mining sites. Furthermore, as Landsat and Copernicus together provide coverage of over 30 years we were able to forecast the trend of the changes in shoreline for the next few years with a certain degree of uncertainty. 
Our business model relies on blending elements of social entrepreneurship and the lean start-up model. Over the next months, the SandSat toolbox will be developed to include three robust mod- els: the shoreline model (from current prototype), the bathymetry model, and the ship tracking and detection algorithm. These models will be the backbone of a number of commercial services: retrospective sand mining information, real-time sand mining detection, automatic reporting, and contract compliance monitoring. Each service is a commercial product that will be targeted at specific customers (commercial partners), like governmental departments of conservation, natu- ral resource authorities, and trans-national governmental organisations like the United Nations (UN). These elements comprise the commercial branch of the company. The social branch of the company consists of the User End Platform at which we communicate with the societal partners. The Sahara Mobile App, is targeted for activists who want to tackle illegal sand mining, as well as concerned citizens affected by sand mining near their residential areas. 




